---
layout: default
head.title: Readably
description: Productive programming is about readable code
title: Home
---

# Developers spend 10x more time reading than writing code.

::hero
---
image: '/alpine-0.webp'
---
#title
Your team's productivity depends on the readability of your code.

#description
I'm here to help you write write readable JS, TS, HTML and CSS code that is quick to read, understand and contribute to.
::

I've been a professional front-end developer for more than 10 years now and looking back, the biggest coding mistake I made early in my career was thinking that the goal was to make my code as concices as possible.

Perhaps I was inspided by answers on Stack Overflow, where can seem like a competition to use the fewest lines of code.

Working on a large lagacy codebase with performance issues, I felt a responsibility to not add more code than necessary. In hindsight, the real drag on performance was the huge chunks of code that nobody was willing to touch because they were difficult to read and change.

As the years have passed and I've had the pleasure of maintaining and updating my own code, my attitude has changed.

These days, all our code is minified and compressed before it is served to clients, so the goal isn't typing fewer characters.

Code formatters like Prettier have helped us make our code more readable, simply by stopping us from cramming too much into each line of code.

However, it is still tempting to try to get the job done with the minimum of typing. Being terse makes us feel clever, but it's a trap.

When you write code, it can feels like your are writing something for a machine, but you're not. The reason we have human-readable languages like JavaScript is not for the benefit of machines, it's for the benefit of humans.

Consider these two examples.

```JavaScript
const f = (s) => `${s.options[s.selectedIndex].text} is ${["bear", "cat"].includes(s.value) ? '' : 'not '}a mammal`;
document.getElementById("select-animal").addEventListener('change', e => alert(f(e.target)));
```

```JavaScript
const MAMMALS = ["bear", "cat"];

const animalSelectElement = document.getElementById("select-animal");

animalSelectElement.addEventListener("change", () => alertMammal());

function alertMammal() {
  const animalIndex = animalSelectElement.selectedIndex;
  const animalText = animalSelectElement.options[animalIndex].text;
  
  const animalValue = animalSelectElement.value;
  const isMammal = MAMMALS.includes(animalValue);

  const mammalMessage = `${animalText} ${isMammal ? 'is' : 'is not'} a mammal`;

  alert(mammalMessage);
}
```

It might not be obvious at first, but both achieve the exact same thing using the same JavaScript techniques.

- The first is 2 lines made up of 205 characters
- The second is 17 lines of code made up of 534 characters!

So the first appears to be 62% smaller, and if we really were writing code for machines, that would make it better.

However, after being minified with Terser and gzipped, ready to serve on the web:

- The first is 205 bytes
- The second is 228 bytes

So in production, the first is only 10% smaller, and those 23 bytes are just not worth what you sacrifice in readability.

Admitadly, writing code that is this descriptive will take a little longer, but what you loose in writing time, you gain many times over by making it easy to understand.

- Faster code reviews
- Quicker to find and fix bugs
- Simpler to change, extend and refactor
- Easier for new developers to contribute

I am on a mission to make code more human. 

When I write code, I think about whether my past self from 5 years ago would have understood it. I think about how happy my future self in 5 years time will be to maintain it.

Most of all, think about my colleagues. If I left tomorrow, will they be cursing me for the mess I left behind, or grateful for the time I took to make my code readable?

::gallery
---
images:
  - /alpine-0.webp
  - /alpine-1.webp
  - /alpine-2.webp
---
::
